# The Link/ Data Link Layer

> One of the most important rules for transferring data from one place to another is identifying the device to which we want to send that data. The protocols operating at this layer are primarily concerned with the identification of devices on the physical network and moving data over the physical network between the devices that comprise it, such as hosts (e.g. computers), switches, and routers.

The Link Layer is an interface between the workings of the physical network and the more logical layers above. It is the lowest layer in which encapsulation occurs.

> At the physical layer, the data is essentially a stream of bits in one form or another without any logical structure. An Ethernet Frame adds logical structure to this binary data. The data in the frame is still in the form of bits, but the structure defines which bits are actually the data payload, and which are metadata to be used in the process of transporting the frame.



# Ethernet protocol

The Ethernet Protocol is the most commonly used protocol at the Link or Data Link Layer.

## Ethernet Frames
Ethernet Frames are a Protocol Data Unit that encapsulate data from the Network layer above it. Ethernet Frame are ***structured data***.
> The key components to remember are the Source and Destination MAC address and the Data Payload.





# What is a network hub?
A hub is a basic piece of network hardware that replicates a message and forwards it to all of the devices on the network.

# What is a network switch?
A switch is a piece of hardware that you connect devices to, to create a network. "Unlike a hub however, a switch uses the destination address in order to direct a frame only to the device for which it is intended." It works by keeping a MAC Address Table so the switch can direct frames to the correct device.


# What is a MAC address?
The MAC address of a network-enabled device is the 'burned in' address, or the physical address, because it is essentially bound permanently to the device (it can be changed, but generally does not). MAC addresses are physical, not logical. MAC addresses are flat, i.e. the entire address is a single sequence of values and can't be sub-divided.


> Every network-enabled device, e.g. a Network Interface Card (NIC) that you would find in a PC or laptop, is assigned a unique MAC Address when it is manufactured. Since this address is linked to the specific physical device, and (usually) doesn't change, it is sometimes referred to as the physical address or burned-in address. MAC Addresses are formatted as a sequence of six two-digit hexadecimal numbers, e.g. 00:40:96:9d:68:0a, with different ranges of addresses being assigned to different network hardware manufacturers.

# What is the format of a MAC address?
MAC Addresses are formatted as a sequence of six two-digit hexadecimal numbers, e.g. 00:40:96:9d:68:0a


 In theory, we could conduct inter-network communication just using MAC addresses, but this is not practical at all due to scale. 






<!-- From Launch School --> https://launchschool.com/lessons/4af196b9/assignments/81df3782
- Preamble and SFD: The Preamble and Start of Frame Delimiter (SFD/ SOF) generally aren't considered part of the actual frame but are sent just prior to the frame as a synchronization measure which notifies the receiving device to expect frame data and then identify the start point of that data. The preamble is seven bytes (56 bits) long and the SFD is one byte (eight bits). Both use a repeated pattern that can be recognised by the receiving device, which then knows that the data following after is the frame data.

- Source and Destination MAC address: The next two fields, each six bytes (48 bits) long, are the source and destination MAC addresses. The source address is the address of the device which created the frame (as we'll see later on in this assignment, this can change at various points along the data's journey). The destination MAC address is the address of the device for which the data is ultimately intended. MAC Addresses are a key part of the Ethernet protocol; we'll look at them in more detail shortly.

- Length: the next field is two bytes (16 bits) in length. It is used to indicate the size of the Data Payload.

- DSAP, SSAP, Control: The next three fields are all one byte (8 bits) in length. The DSAP and SSAP fields identify the Network Protocol used for the Data Payload. The Control field provides information about the specific communication mode for the frame, which helps facilitate flow control.

- Data Payload: the data payload field can be between 42 and 1497 bytes in length. It contains the data for the entire Protocol Data Unit (PDU) from the layer above, an IP Packet for example.

- Frame Check Sequence (FCS): The final four bytes (32 bits) of an Ethernet Frame is the Frame Check Sequence. This is a checksum generated by the device which creates the frame. It is calculated from the frame data using an algorithm such as a cyclic redundancy check. The receiving device uses the same algorithm to generate a FCS and then compares this to the FCS in the sent frame. If the two don't match, then the frame is dropped. Ethernet doesn't implement any kind of retransmission functionality for dropped frames; it is the responsibility of higher level protocols to manage retransmission of lost data if this is a requirement of the protocol.



Interframe Gap
As well as using the Preamble and SFD to prepare a receiving device to process the frame data, Ethernet also specifies an interframe gap (IFG). This gap is a brief pause between the transmission of each frame, which permits the receiver to prepare to receive the next frame. The length of this gap varies according to the capability of the Ethernet connection. For example, for 100 Mbps Ethernet the gap is 0.96 microseconds (or just under one millionth of a second).

This Interframe gap contributes to the Transmission Delay element of latency we looked at in the previous assignment.